---
author:
- Matthew Hamilton
bibliography: main.bib
date: 2025-07-29
title: "Historical Harpsichord Keyboard Exhibition: San Colombano"
---

# Introduction

![Augmented replica keyboard
interface](img/49-key-front-top.png){#fig:49-key width="60%"}

Musical instruments present a uniquely challenging problem within the
heritage sector. Unlike many heritage objects, they are both aesthetic
artifacts and functional tools for producing music. This duality
complicates conservation approaches if there is to be a balance between
instrument's physical integrity and its functional capability as a
sound-producing device. This balance is central to understanding the
broader philosophical and practical questions involved in the
conservation of musical instruments, and it invites a re-examination of
traditional frameworks to better encompass their hybrid nature. This
article will discuss the nature of musical instruments as heritage
objects and presents a recent project at Museo San Colombano in Bologna,
Italy, for which a new augmented replica harpsichord keyboard interface
(Figure [1](#fig:49-key){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:49-key"})
was created. The goal of the project was to reintroduce the experience
of playing historical keyboard instruments. This project embodies the
intersection of conservation philosophy, technical innovation, and
museum practice, providing a practical case study on how living
interaction with heritage instruments might be facilitated while
safeguarding their material and cultural values.

# Living vs Dead Heritage

Over recent decades, there has been a greater discourse around 'living
heritage' versus the static, preservable 'dead' heritage
`\parencite{poulios_moving_2010,smith_uses_2006}`{=latex}.

Poulios critiques values-based conservation for treating the past as
something 'dead,' resulting in a discontinuity between past and present
experiences `\parencite{poulios_moving_2010}`{=latex}. In contrast, the
'living heritage' paradigm emphasizes the ongoing, dynamic use and
relevance of heritage, advocating for the preservation of not just
physical artifacts but the practices, skills, and meanings that sustain
them in contemporary life.

While Poulios' arguments are primarily directed at heritage sites and
ceremonial objects, the underlying philosophy is applicable to the wider
umbrella heritage objects, particularly musical instruments. There is
false dichotomy that presents conservation as a choice between heritage
as static and 'dead' or 'living'.[^1]. The reality is more complex and
to treat heritage as perpetually living without acknowledging its
material finitude risks creating an 'undead' heritage, neither truly
alive nor preserved.

# A New Value for Conservation

The justification for conserving heritage objects often rests upon a
complex matrix of values. Avrami et al.
(`\citeyear{avrami_values_2000}`{=latex}) provide a collection of value
systems that underpin conservation decisions across different
disciplines and organizations, summarized in Table
[1](#tab:values_comparison){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:values_comparison"}.

:::: adjustbox
width=

::: {#tab:values_comparison}
  ----------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------- --------------------------
  **Art History**   **ICOMOS Australia**                                                **Economics**   **English Heritage**
  Alois Reigl       Burra Charter                                                       Bruno Frey      
  1902              1998                                                                1997            1999
  Age               Aesthetic                                                           Monetary        Cultural
  Historical        Historic                                                            Option          Educational and academic
  Commemorative     Scientific                                                          Existence       Economic
  Use               Social (including spiritual, political, national, other cultural)   Bequest         Resource
                                                                                        Prestige        Recreational
                                                                                        Educational     Aesthetic
  ----------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------- --------------------------

  : Comparative Analysis of Value Systems in Heritage Conservation
  `\parencite{avrami_values_2000}`{=latex}.
:::
::::

In addition to those above, I propose as a new category for musical
instruments and potentially all heritage objects that embody craft and
practice: 'instructional value'. Instructional value refers to the
capacity of a heritage object to convey knowledge of practice,
technique, and skill intrinsic to its use and creation. A painting or
sculpture may reveal insights into artistic methods through 'witness
marks', the traces of the artist's hand or materials. Similarly, a
musical instrument can serve as a pedagogical tool for performers,
luthiers, and scholars, instructing through its construction, wear
patterns, and interaction how music was historically produced and
experienced.

Instructional value may superficially appear to be a subset of
educational or academic value. I argue that this conflation obscures a
critical distinction between 'descriptive knowledge' (knowing that) and
'procedural knowledge' (knowing how). This division is essential to
resolving tensions in musical instrument conservation, where preserving
the physical object alone cannot fully capture its performative essence
without maintaining or reviving the skills and practices it embodies.

The discourse around conservation frequently centres on the notion of
'authenticity'
`\parencite{pine_museums_2007, laurenson_authenticity_2006}`{=latex},
particularly regarding historically informed performance
`\parencite{davies_authenticity_2001}`{=latex}. Setting aside the
complexities and debates surrounding the meaning of 'authenticity,' it
is important to recognize that the audience's experience often dominates
discussions of musical heritage. Yet, consider a scenario where a
performer rehearses a piece 50 times before performing to an audience of
50 who hears it once. Which value was represented and by what magnitude
in the course performance? I would argue the performer's experience --
informed by the instrument's unique qualities -- carries significant
instructional value which is equal or greater in magnitude to those
values relevant to audience.

The performer, through hours of embodied interaction, acquires a richer,
more nuanced understanding, gained through tactile feedback and
'gestural repertoires' `\parencite[][]{levinson_music_1990}`{=latex}
intrinsic to playing the instrument. The instrument shapes the
performance as much as the performer shapes the music. This interplay is
especially salient when comparing, for instance, a modern Steinway piano
with a historical harpsichord, where differences in touch, sound
production, and response create distinct musical experiences. Put
simply, this yet another example of McLuhan's maxim that "the medium is
the message" `\parencite[][]{mcluhan_understanding_1964}`{=latex}.

Conventional museum practice rarely permits visitors to handle or play
historical instruments. Though instruments may be in 'playing condition'
they are not typically playable by the average museum visitor. Instead,
instruments cordoned off behind a -- real or imagined -- 'red velvet
cord,' `\parencite{mcalpine_sampling_2014}`{=latex} displayed as objects
to be seen but not touched. This approach robs visitors of the
experience of vibro-tactile and kinaesthetic cues encoded into the
interface of the instrument. The challenge, then, is how to reintroduce
embodied interaction with historical instruments in ways that respect
conservation imperatives while restoring some degree of their living
function.

# Musical Instruments and Authenticity

Conserving musical instruments also raises the philosophical puzzle akin
to the 'Ship of Theseus'. If an object's components are replaced one by
one over time, at what point does it cease to be the original? For
instruments, how many keys, valves, bridges can be substituted? How many
patches and struts can be glued to soundboards before the instrument
ceases to historically authentic?

Laurenson (`\citeyear{laurenson_authenticity_2006}`{=latex}) addresses
authenticity by suggesting that the significance and function of each
component must guide decisions about conservation and change. However,
this approach simply 'kicks the can down the road.' For example,
Laurenson discusses the Walkman in Angus Fairhurst's artwork *Gallery
Connections*, noting that its high value and obsolescence require
preserving the original artifact while replicating its function through
other means `\parencite{laurenson_management_2005}`{=latex}. This
approach demands further reflection when applied to historical musical
instruments already past the point of indefinite preservation while
retaining function.

Davies' (`\citeyear{davies_authenticity_2001}`{=latex}) treatment of
authenticity and substitution in musical performance is influential but
problematic in `\parencite{laurenson_authenticity_2006}`{=latex}.

> "Where the change in instrumentation, and adaptations made to the
> music in the light of this, are significant, the result is a work
> transcription that is distinct from its model. One does not transcribe
> a work merely by crossing out the word 'harpsichord' on the score and
> replacing it with 'piano' \[\...\] however. Neither does the
> substitution of the modern cello for its Baroque cousin result in a
> work transcription."

::: flushright
-- `\parencite[p. 222]{davies_authenticity_2001}`{=latex}
:::

Davies comparison conflates differences of degree ('Baroque' and modern
cello) with kind (harpsichord and pianoforte). The harpsichord and
pianoforte share a keyboard but employ fundamentally different
mechanisms for string excitation (plucking multiple registers vs. a
single hammer) resulting in a qualitative difference in the
vibro-tactile response. Conversely, the baroque and modern cello are
both bowed string instruments with identical excitation physics, despite
evolving dimensions and construction details.[^2] Davies
misunderstanding combined with confusion over Levinson's emphasis on
'gestural repertoires' `\parencite{levinson_music_1990}`{=latex} provide
an example of the precariousness of 'authenticity' and its citation in
`\parencite{laurenson_authenticity_2006}`{=latex} show the consequences
of its misapplication.

Davies also writes:

> "It is relevant to add a second observation to this first: period
> instruments, when played in the style of the day, sound different from
> modern ones, but, as well, they sound better. They make clearer or
> more salient features of the work that are aesthetically significant."

::: flushright
-- `\parencite[p. 218]{davies_authenticity_2001}`{=latex}
:::

To allow some leniency to Davies, there have scientific been studies
exploring these ideas, but they do result in Davies assessment here
being objectively incorrect. Given the recent studies by Fritz et al.
(`\citeyear{fritz_player_2012, fritz_soloist_2014, fritz_listener_2017}`{=latex})
on old violins -- and assuming it is not a stretch to apply the same
conclusions to other string instruments -- Davies assessment here is
objectively incorrect. This brings us back to the instructional value of
historical instruments: they are finite, their sounds do not age well,
they cannot be simply substituted without compromise. How do we maintain
a historical instruments capacity to teach and communicate performance
practice when it is deeply embedded in their material and functional
characteristics? If substitutions or restorations alter these features,
they risk severing vital links to past knowledge and experience. The
Tagliavini Collection in Bologna
`\parencite{tagliavini_clavicembali_1987}`{=latex}, housed at Museo San
Colombano - Genus Bononiae and renowned for its historical keyboard
instruments, exemplifies this dilemma.

# Museo San Colombano Exhibition

![Electronically Augmented Keyboard Interface. Colour LEDs are hidden
from visitors by the name plate. These LEDs were used in the development
and calibration process for visual feedback of key
states.](img/mark2.png){#fig:mark2 width="100%"}

With over fifty early keyboard instruments, primarily early plucked
stringed keyboards of Italian origin, the Tagliavini Collection stands
out as a valuable resource for musicologists, organologists and
musicians alike. Preserving the instruments' authenticity was the
cornerstone of Ferdinando Tagliavini's vision. This guiding principle
led him to collect instruments that could be restored to their playing
condition after minimal intervention.

In a collaboration between Museo San Colombano and the NEMUS project, we
designed an electronically augmented replica of a historical harpsichord
keyboard for interaction with digital musical instruments (Figure
[1](#fig:49-key){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:49-key"}
[2](#fig:mark2){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:mark2"}). The goal
was to enable visitors to experience the harpsichord's unique
vibro-tactile qualities without risking damage to the original artifacts
and offer an immersive learning environment. The keyboard incorporates
an optical sensor system and digital sound synthesis to replicate the
physical feedback and acoustic response of an original 15th century
harpsichord in the Italian style.

![Scale comparison between a 15th Century logarithmic shape and the new
keyboard interface.](img/outline_compare.pdf){#fig:log-harp-comp
width="50%"}

This new interface builds on the work of McAlpine
(`\citeyear{mcalpine_sampling_2014}`{=latex}) with the Benton Fletcher
Collection. However, user tests identified a limitation: the
commercially available weighted keys failed to provide an authentic
sense of interacting with a historical plucked keyboard instrument
`\parencite{mcalpine_sampling_2014}`{=latex}. The "Tromba Moderna"
project `\parencite{baldwin_tromba_2016}`{=latex} approached the issue
of musical heritage playability by recreating and augmenting a replica
of a historical tromba marina. A piezo transducer was connected to a
sound synthesis engine and a driver within the instrument to simulate
the expected vibrations of a historical tromba marina. The new keyboard
inherits some aspects from the Tromba Moderna project and addresses the
limitations on the project by McAlpine. The optical sensing technique
for the keyboard is adapted from a similar project on the piano by
McPherson `\parencite{mcpherson_portable_2013}`{=latex}.

The aesthetics of the interface attempt to leverage the human tendency
to be influenced by visual elements when making musical judgments
`\parencite{tsay_sight_2013, fritz_player_2012,fritz_soloist_2014,fritz_listener_2017}`{=latex}
and enhance its likelihood of being perceived as an 'authentic' by
visitors. The rectangular frame deviates from the traditional
logarithmic (Figure [3](#fig:log-harp-comp){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:log-harp-comp"}) form as the interface needed be compact
enough not to compromise space for exhibition of the permanent display.
The keyboard is hosted in the Oratory above the museum's main hall
(Figure [4](#fig:installed){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:installed"}) alongside unique examples of the Italian
Renaissance building tradition, including the 1547 harpsichord and the
1540 spinet by Alessandro Trasuntino.

![Installation of the new keyboard in the Oratory, San
Colombano.](img/installation.png){#fig:installed width="50%"}

The interface is presently linked to a commercial software sampler;
however, the ultimate aim is to make the sound of instruments in the
collection that can no longer be maintained in playable condition
accessible. Museum visitors are invited to play the interface and listen
through a pair of headphones (Figure [5](#fig:user){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:user"}).

![Visitor to the exhibition demonstrating headphone
setup.](img/exhibition-user-1.jpeg){#fig:user width="33%"}

# Conclusion

The exhibition opened February 2025 and since then there have been two
rounds of preliminary feedback collected. The first from a pool of 20
people -- consisting of staff, surveillance personnel and visitors who
were given training on the system -- and expert feedback from curator
Catalina Vicens and luthier Roberto Livi. The second round as part of a
wider survey of the exhibition on a group of approximately 50 PhD
students. This survey was in a five-point scale format the results of
which are still being collected. From this group it was observed that
some did not play the interface. When these visitors were later asked
why they did not play the reasons given were that did not think they
were allowed to touch the instrument. This could be considered in
compliment for accuracy in the aesthetics of the keyboard but may also
suggest a wider problem with encouraging interaction in the museum
context.

Future design iterations will serve as a research probe to explore the
unique characteristics of the harpsichord and its impact on performance
much in the same manner as other musical haptics studies
`\parencite{charalampos-saitis_musical_2018}`{=latex}. A longer
discussion, but one going beyond the scope of this work, is whether the
current setup or its future iterations may be effectively used to build
legitimate replicas of historical musical instruments or even become a
kind of new musical instrument altogether.

I argue here that a holistic conservation framework for musical
instruments must integrate both values-based and living heritage
perspectives. Such a synthesis acknowledges the physical realities of
ageing instruments while honouring their performative and instructional
roles. Moreover, this integration opens pathways to novel conservation
strategies that extend beyond current paradigms.

[^1]: ```\footcite[``a handful dismissed the idea of heritage as a negative idea, noting for instance that heritage was ‘keeping that which aught to be alive dead.''][]{smith_uses_2006}```{=latex}.

[^2]: It is questionable to say there is such a thing as a 'Baroque'
    cello (or violin) as designs of the period differ.
